**Research Proposal: Participatory Modeling for Societal Complexity in
Healthcare**

By Heider Jeffer

**Hello and welcome!**


We're excited to share our work on participatory modeling for societal complexity in healthcare. 

**Explore and engage with our resources below:**

* Discover Our Project: Learn about our approach and research on <a href="https://github.com/HeiderJeffer/Participatory-Modeling-for-Societal-Complexity-in-Healthcare">GitHub</a>.

* Try It Out: Experiment with our simulation through this interactive <a href="https://colab.research.google.com/drive/105ePLc-icF1qyzUB-VX9SQ446raubosx?authuser=2">Google Colab notebook</a>.

* Explore the Code: Dive into the details of our simulation by reviewing the <a href="https://github.com/HeiderJeffer/Participatory-Modeling-for-Societal-Complexity-in-Healthcare/blob/main/Healthcare%20Participatory%20Model%20Simulation/Healthcare%20Participatory%20Model%20Simulation.ipynb">source code</a>.
*  Here you can find: <a href="https://github.com/HeiderJeffer/Participatory-Modeling-for-Societal-Complexity-in-Healthcare/blob/main/documents/Research%20Questions.pdf">How we use Python to answer the Research Questions</a>

* In the appendix you can find: <a href="https://github.com/HeiderJeffer/Participatory-Modeling-for-Societal-Complexity-in-Healthcare/blob/main/documents/appendix%20.pdf"> Formula, Numerical Example, Simulation Steps that we used in Python to answer the research questions</a>

* Here you can find <a href="https://github.com/HeiderJeffer/Participatory-Modeling-for-Societal-Complexity-in-Healthcare/blob/main/documents/Requirements.txt"> Software Requirements</a>



We'd love for you to explore, experiment, and share your thoughts with us!

**Introduction**

The increasing complexity of healthcare systems, particularly in
addressing aging-related challenges, calls for innovative,
multi-disciplinary approaches to develop sustainable and effective
policies. Computational simulations of real-world phenomena, known as
*in silico* models, provide unparalleled opportunities to optimize
healthcare processes by understanding and predicting system dynamics.
However, deploying these models requires a nuanced understanding of
societal complexity, including stakeholder dynamics, institutional
barriers, and incentive structures.

This research aims to bridge the gap between advanced computational
modeling and real-world healthcare applications by leveraging
**participatory modeling**. This collaborative approach engages diverse
stakeholders to co-develop models that reflect societal and systemic
nuances, ensuring both accuracy and usability.

**Research Objectives**

1.  **Develop a Participatory Modeling Framework**\
    Establish a research protocol to capture agency complexities,
    structural hindrances, and incentive dynamics, focusing on
    hospital-level adoption of *in silico* models.

2.  **Model Societal Complexity in Model Deployment**\
    Use System Dynamics Modeling (SDM) and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
    to simulate interactions between stakeholders, such as clinicians,
    administrators, and policymakers, to explore:

    -   Barriers to adoption,

    -   Strategies for incentivizing uptake,

    -   Policy implications for healthcare delivery optimization.

3.  **Validate Participatory Methods and Policies**\
    Develop actionable policies through participatory workshops and
    validate outcomes using real-world stakeholder feedback and data.

4.  **Evaluate Impact**\
    Measure the effectiveness of participatory modeling in fostering *in
    silico* model adoption and its effect on healthcare optimization.

**Research Approach**

**Mixed Methods Framework**

This research integrates qualitative and quantitative methodologies to
provide a comprehensive understanding of societal complexities in
healthcare systems. A **concurrent triangulation design** will ensure
that insights from both qualitative and quantitative data collection are
validated and synthesized iteratively.

**1. Literature Review**

-   Conduct a systematic review of participatory modeling and *in
    silico* applications in healthcare.

-   Identify best practices and gaps, providing a foundation for the
    proposed framework.

**2. Stakeholder Engagement**

**Qualitative Data Collection**

-   **Workshops**: Host participatory sessions with stakeholders (e.g.,
    clinicians, patients, administrators) to explore challenges,
    motivations, and perceptions related to *in silico* model adoption.

-   **Interviews**: Conduct semi-structured interviews to gather
    in-depth insights into stakeholders' behaviors, concerns, and
    expectations.

-   **Document Analysis**: Analyze policies, healthcare guidelines, and
    organizational documents to identify institutional barriers.

**Quantitative Data Collection**

-   **Surveys**: Distribute structured questionnaires to measure
    attitudes, priorities, and the prevalence of identified barriers.

-   **Observational Data**: Collect real-world data on current
    workflows, resource allocations, and decision-making processes
    within healthcare systems.

**3. Model Development**

**System Dynamics Modeling (SDM)**

-   Use SDM to simulate interactions among stakeholders and visualize
    systemic feedback loops.

-   Quantify the impact of proposed policies and strategies on model
    adoption.

**Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)**

-   Incorporate HMMs to account for behavioral uncertainties and
    transition probabilities in stakeholder decision-making processes.

**Integration of Qualitative Insights**

-   Map qualitative findings (e.g., resistance themes, collaboration
    patterns) into model parameters to ensure they reflect real-world
    complexity.

**4. Validation and Refinement**

-   **Participatory Feedback**: Present preliminary models to
    stakeholders in workshops and incorporate their feedback.

-   **Case Study Application**: Test models against real-world scenarios
    at Karolinska University Hospital to refine their accuracy.

-   **Triangulated Analysis**: Compare model outputs with qualitative
    narratives and survey results to validate findings.

**5. Policy Recommendations**

-   Develop evidence-based policies informed by model simulations and
    stakeholder insights.

-   Pilot these recommendations during the planned secondment at VU
    Amsterdam and refine based on further feedback.

**Expected Findings**

1.  **Framework Development**

    -   A validated participatory modeling framework tailored to the
        complexities of healthcare systems.

    -   Practical guidelines for integrating stakeholder perspectives
        into computational models.

2.  **Insights into Societal Complexity**

    -   Quantitative identification of key barriers (e.g., adoption
        rates, resource constraints).

    -   Qualitative understanding of stakeholder dynamics and
        institutional challenges.

3.  **Policy Effectiveness**

    -   Evidence-based strategies to incentivize model uptake.

    -   Improved hospital-level outcomes through optimized resource
        allocation and stakeholder collaboration.

4.  **Validation of Participatory Modeling**

    -   Enhanced stakeholder alignment and ownership of *in silico*
        models.

    -   Greater usability and acceptance of proposed policies, leading
        to broader implementation.

**Year Planning**

**Year 1: Foundations**

-   Conduct literature review.

-   Initiate stakeholder engagement through interviews and surveys.

-   Develop a preliminary SDM framework.

**Year 2: Model Refinement**

-   Integrate qualitative findings into SDMs.

-   Incorporate HMMs to address uncertainties.

-   Conduct participatory workshops to validate the models.

**Year 3: Validation**

-   Apply models to case studies at Karolinska University Hospital.

-   Refine policies based on validation feedback.

-   Test recommendations at VU Amsterdam.

**Year 4: Dissemination**

-   Publish findings in peer-reviewed journals.

-   Finalize the participatory modeling framework.

-   Complete and defend the doctoral thesis.

**Significance**

This research addresses the challenges of deploying *in silico* models
for healthy aging by incorporating societal complexity through
participatory methods. By combining qualitative and quantitative data
collection and analysis, the project ensures that these models are not
only technically sound but also socially viable and impactful. The
results have the potential to revolutionize how healthcare organizations
adopt computational tools to enhance patient outcomes and operational
efficiency.

"I authorize the processing of my personal data pursuant to art. 13 of
Legislative Decree no. 196 of 30 June 2003 - \"Personal Data Protection
Code\" and art. 13 of GDPR 679/16 - \"European Regulation on the
Protection of Personal Data\".


Heider Jeffer


17th November 2024
